CHAPTER XIII.
The same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the seaside, and great multitudes
were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship and sat, and the whole multitude
and he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold a sower went forth to sow,
and when he sowed some seeds fell by the wayside, and the fowls came and devoured them up. Some
fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth, and forthwith they sprung up,
because they had no deepness of earth, and when the sun was up they were scorched, and because
they had no root they withered away. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprung up and
choked them. But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some and hundredfold,
some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold. Who hath ears to hear? Let him hear. And the disciples came,
and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables? He answered, and said unto them,
Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
given. For whosoever hath to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance. But whosoever
hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath. Therefore I speak to them in parables,
because they seeing see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. And in
them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand, and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For this people's heart is waxed
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed. Lest at any time they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them. But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your
ears for they hear. For verily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men have desired
to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear,
and have not heard them. Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. When anyone heareth the
word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that
which was sown in his heart. This is he which received seed by the wayside. But he that received
the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it.
Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for a while. For when tribulation and persecution
arises because of the word, by and by he is offended. He also that received seed among the
thorns is he that heareth the word, and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches,
choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful. But he that received seed into the good ground is he
that heareth the word, and understandeth it, which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth,
some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty. Another parable put he forth unto them, saying,
The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. But while men slept,
his enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up,
and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came,
and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? From whence then hath it tares?
He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servant said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go
and gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest while ye gather up the tares ye root up also the wheat
with them. Let both grow together until the harvest. And in the time of harvest I will say
to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them.
But gather the wheat into my barn. Another parable put he forth unto them, saying,
The kingdom of heaven is likened to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his
field, which indeed is the least of all seeds. But when it is grown, it is the greatest among
herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
Another parable spake he unto them, The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven,
which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened. All these
things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables. And without a parable spake he not unto them.
It might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables.
I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.
Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house. And his disciples came unto him,
saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field. He answered and said unto them,
He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man, the field is the world, the good seed are the
children of the kingdom, but the tares are the children of the wicked one. The enemy that sowed
them is the devil, the harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are the angels.
As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this
world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all
things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire.
There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth, then shall the righteous shine forth as the
Son in the kingdom of their Father, who hath ears to hear let him hear. Again the kingdom of heaven
is like unto treasure hidden in a field, the which when a man hath found he hideth, and for
thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field. Again the kingdom of heaven is
like unto a merchant man seeking goodly pearls, who when he had found one pearl of great price,
went and sold all that he had, and bought it. Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net
that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind, which when it was full they drew it to shore,
and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. So shall it be at the end
of the world. The angel shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall
cast them into the furnace of fire. There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord.
Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven,
is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new,
and old. And it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed thence,
and when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, in so much
that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works?
Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brethren James,
and Joses, and Simon, and Judas, and his sisters? Are they not all with us? Whence then hath this
man all these things? And they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not
without honor save in his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works
there because of their unbelief. End of chapter 13. Recording by Michael Packard